Split Assertion into Assertion and AbridgedAssertion (#49)
davidben/merkle-tree-certs: draft-davidben-tls-merkle-tree-certs.md

Assertion:
: A protocol-specific statement that the CA is certifying. For example, in TLS, the assertion is that a TLS signing key can speak on behalf of some DNS name or other identity.

Abridged assertion:

> : A partially-hashed *Assertion* to save space. For example, in TLS, an abridged assertion replaces the subject public key by a hash.

Author: > Re "For example, ...", this isn't really a TLS-specific construction, right? We're just hashing the subject naively.

At the moment we are, but we could vary that for other subject types. Reason I add TLS explicitly as an example, is that it is easier to follow: the reader might not know what *subject information* is.

> we haven't really been italicizing structure names

Removed italicisation. It was meant more as emphasis instead of consistent style.

For each batch in the "issued" state, the CA maintains the following batch state:

> * The list of abridged assertions certified in this batch.

Author: For TLS it's as if we dictate that everyone can only use the replace-public-key-by-its-hash-and-put-the-public-key-together-with-the-signature transform of each signature scheme.

We do miss the opportunity to analyse (some types of) weak public keys.

I don't think the latter is worthwhile to demand CAs to retain the unabridged assertions. Perhaps I missed an application of keeping them around?

> * The list of abridged assertions certified in this batch.

Author: Ah, I see you came to [the same preliminary conclusion](https://github.com/davidben/merkle-tree-certs/pull/49#discussion_r1313836002).

> * The list of abridged assertions certified in this batch.

Author: I added some text to the security considerations section.

    opaque right[hash.length];
} HashNodeInput;

struct {
    SubjectType subject_type;
    opaque subject_info_hash[hash.length];
    Claim claims<0..2^16-1>;

> } AbridgedAssertion;

Reviewer: Somewhere (security considerations? the Transparency section?) I think we should discuss the implications of abridged assertions. Something to the effect that it still allows domain owners to recognize unauthorized issuance. You check, for all abridged assertions with a claim that matches your domain, and if any hashes don't match one you authorized, report a misissuance even though the preimage is not available.

And probably we should mention that, unlike CT, folks cannot search the logs for weak keys, since we've hashed them down, unless the CA provides the unabridged values somewhere. (Though given the whole point is to reduce the serving load with PQ keys...)

Author: Continuing in [the other thread](https://github.com/davidben/merkle-tree-certs/pull/49#discussion_r1313834970).

The transparency service does not prevent unauthorized certificates, but it aims to provide comparable security properties to Certificate Transparency {{?RFC6962}}. If a subscriber presents an acceptable Merkle Tree certificate to a relying party, the relying party should have assurance it was published in some form that monitors and, in particular, the subject of the certificate will be able to notice.

> One notable difference with Certificate Transparency is that the present transparency services do not publish the public keys, but rather hashes of them. This does not impede a relying party to detect a misissuance, by comparing with the hash of the expected public key. However, it does complicate studies (eg. {{SharedFactors}}) of weak public keys: researchers will have to retrieve the public keys from the TLS servers by connecting to them.

Reviewer: Well, connecting to them may not work if the server is no longer presenting the keys. I also think it's worth a sentence for why we're sacrificing this. Perhaps...

```suggestion
One notable difference with Certificate Transparency is that transparency services do not publish the public keys, but rather hashes of them. This is intended to reduce serving costs, particularly with large post-quantum keys. Relying partings can still detect misissuance by looking for unexpected `subject_info_hash` values. However, this optimization complicates studies of weak public keys, e.g. {{SharedFactors}}. Such studies will have to retrieve the public keys separately, such as by connecting to the TLS servers, or fetching from the CA if it retains the unabridged assertion. This document does not define a mechanism for doing this.
```

I left open the possibility of the CA retaining it. Since the costs are more serving than storage, I think it'd be reasonable for a CA to retain it (possibly even expect them to, but we can leave that for later), and then maybe the researcher could work with a cooperating CA to fetch it. I'm assuming a one-off fetch is fine and it's really just persistently serving that much data to be costly.

Does that seem reasonable to you? We can also drop it, but I feel like if we just say "oh fetch it from the TLS server", we'll immediately invite all kinds of comments that the TLS server may not be serving it anymore. We're really saying we're okay not considering this use case to be in scope.

> One notable difference with Certificate Transparency is that transparency services do not publish the public keys, but rather hashes of them. This is intended to reduce serving costs, particularly with large post-quantum keys. Relying partings can still detect misissuance by looking for unexpected `subject_info_hash` values. However, this optimization complicates studies of weak public keys, e.g. {{SharedFactors}}. Such studies will have to retrieve the public keys separately, such as by connecting to the TLS servers, or fetching from the CA if it retains the unabridged assertion. This document does not define a mechanism for doing this.

Reviewer: Oops, I typed "Relying partings" in my suggestion. Let's see if I can just fix that inline...
